0 Hamlet
Although Hamlet himself desires to see Claudius pay for his crime,
he realizes the evil in the deed of killing the king, prompted by both
"heaven and hell" (II.ii.586). The ghost has placed Hamlet in a most
unnatural position by asking him to commit murder.
5 Hamlet hates the king for his treachery, but he would not act on that
hate if he were not prompted to do so by the ghost.
Claudius
As with all the supporting characters in Hamlet, Claudius is not developed
to his full potential. His primary role in the play is to spawn Hamlet's
10 confusion and anger, and his subsequent search for truth and life's
meaning. But Claudius is not a static character. While his qualities
are not as thoroughly explored as Hamlet's, Shakespeare crafts a whole
human being out of the treacherous, usurping King of Denmark.
Gertrude
15 Gertrude is, more so than any other character in the play,
the antithesis of her son, Hamlet. Hamlet is a scholar and a philosopher,
searching for life's most elusive answers. He cares nothing for this
"mortal coil" and the vices to which man has become slave.
Gertrude is shallow and thinks only about her body and external pleasures.
20 Like a child she longs to be delighted. We do not see much of her in daily
activity, but if we could we would see a woman enraptured by trinkets and
fine clothes, soft pillows and warm baths. Gertrude is also a very sexual
being, and it is her sexuality that turns Hamlet so violently against her.
Horatio
25 Horatio's role in the play is minor and most critics agree that he is not
developed beyond a character foil for the great Prince. However, Horatio
serves two purposes central to the drama, and it is through these purposes
that we can best discuss those qualities that make Horatio memorable.
Ophelia
30 Of all the pivotal characters in Hamlet, Ophelia is the most static and
one-dimensional. She has the potential to become a tragic heroine
to overcome the adversities inflicted upon her, but she instead crumbles
into insanity, becoming merely tragic. It appears that Ophelia herself
is not as important as her representation of the dual nature of women
35 in the play. The extent to which Hamlet feels betrayed by Gertrude is
far more apparent because of Ophelia's presence.